feat: AI driven coding and deployment guide (#1119)
mittwald/developer-portal: docs/guides/deployment/ai_developed_apps.mdx

---

## Introduction / Motivation {#introduction-motivation}

With rapidly advancing AI-driven development tools, building applications has become more accessible than ever.
We want to make it as easy as possible to take the apps you create — whether prototyped quickly or developed thoughtfully — and ship them to the world with confidence.

Besides rapid prototyping and development, we want to enable users to easily share their
AI-developed apps with others and deploy them to production environments without
needing to worry about complex deployment processes or configurations.

Whether you're building a small business app or a more complex application using AI-driven development, this guide will help you get
your app from your local machine (or cloud-based IDE) to the world with minimal friction.

Deploying an app is exciting — and worth doing thoughtfully. Compliance, privacy, security and operational
responsibility matter, and we recommend connecting with our community if you have questions.

## AI-developed app landscape overview {#ai-developed-app-landscape-overview}

Apps built through AI-driven development are easy to create, and deployment options vary widely.

> Different platforms offer different trade-offs. Vendors like Replit and Lovable prioritize developer speed

Reviewer: Just wondering if it might even make sense to have dedicated pages (or sections, at least) for "Deploy from Replit to mittwald" and similar. Possible alone for SEO reasons... 🤔

Author: Good one. This will also help to find answers on customer questions regarding vendor "XYZ". Created two separate sections for Replit and Lovable apps, pointing to their specific export and deployment behavior. Might even be extended in the future :+1:

and ease of use with their specific project templates, build systems, and deployment pipelines. This convenience
comes with a trade-off: moving your app to another platform later may require rework.
On the other hand, you get a fast path to production with integrated tools and support.

Platforms like GitHub and mittwald, on the other hand, offer more standard and flexible
deployment options that can be easily adapted to different environments.

By using GitHub as a central repository for your AI-developed app, you can maintain
a clear history of changes, collaborate with others, and deploy to various platforms
without being tied to a specific vendor's ecosystem.

This approach allows for greater freedom and control over your app's deployment
while still benefiting from the ease and speed that AI-driven development provides.

## GitHub is our anchor {#github-is-our-anchor}

If we can export to GitHub, we have good chances to deploy anywhere.

> Most platforms support GitHub as a source for deployment, and having a well-structured

Reviewer: Maybe even link to vendor-specific documentation pages, like https://docs.replit.com/references/workspace-tools/git-interface or https://docs.lovable.dev/integrations/github?

Keep the stack small: the more dependencies and services your app relies on, the more complex the deployment process becomes.

Use standard tools and configurations: sticking to widely used tools and configurations can increase compatibility
with various deployment platforms.

Document your app's requirements and dependencies clearly: this can help others understand what is needed to
deploy the app successfully and can also assist in troubleshooting any issues that arise during deployment.

Audit security and privacy best practices: ensuring that your app follows security and privacy best practices
can help prevent issues during deployment and operation. Avoid hardcoding secrets, use environment variables,
and regularly review your dependencies for vulnerabilities.

Deployment checklist:
- [ ] App runs locally without errors
- [ ] All secrets/keys are out of your code!
- [ ] README explains setup & usage
- [ ] Build/export scripts work
- [ ] Tested app in a browser/incognito window
- [ ] Backups: Save a copy of your project!
- [ ] Choose a reliable host that meets your needs
- [ ] Shared the link with a friend — get feedback
- [ ] Celebrate your first deploy! 🎉

> ## Zero-conf deployment at mittwald {#zero-conf-deployment-at-mittwald}

Reviewer: Maybe rebase this change on top of #1124, so we can already link to that action's documentation?

Author: Would prefer to rebase on `master` tbh, avoid stacking branches on top of each other. I think #1124 is rdy

allowing users to deploy their apps directly from GitHub with minimal setup.

Currently, there are two main paths for zero-conf deployment of AI-developed apps:
- Manually via mittwald CLI
- Automated via GitHub Actions

The recommended approach is to start with the manual CLI deployment to understand the
process and then move towards automation with GitHub Actions for a more streamlined
and efficient deployment workflow.

A separate extension for mStudio is also in the works, which will further simplify
the deployment process by providing an integrated experience within the development environment.

## Quickstart guide for zero-conf deployment of AI-developed apps {#quickstart-zero-conf-deployment-ai-developed-apps}

Prerequisites:
- An AI-developed app with a GitHub repository
- A mittwald hosting account
- Basic understanding of Git and GitHub
- mittwald CLI installed and configured

Manual quickstart steps:
1. Prepare your AI-developed app for deployment: verify that it runs locally and that all dependencies are installed.

```shellsession
user@local $ git clone https://github.com/<your-org>/<your-repo>.git
user@local $ cd <your-repo>

> ```

Reviewer: Indentation, otherwise this will break the markdown list.

- [ ] Backups: Save a copy of your project!
- [ ] Choose a reliable host that meets your needs
- [ ] Shared the link with a friend — get feedback
- [ ] Celebrate your first deploy! 🎉

## Zero-conf deployment at mittwald {#zero-conf-deployment-at-mittwald}

mittwald offers a zero-conf deployment option for AI-developed apps,
allowing users to deploy their apps directly from GitHub with minimal setup.

Currently, there are two main paths for zero-conf deployment of AI-developed apps:
- Manually via mittwald CLI
- Automated via GitHub Actions

The recommended approach is to start with the manual CLI deployment to understand the
process and then move towards automation with GitHub Actions for a more streamlined
and efficient deployment workflow.

A separate extension for mStudio is also in the works, which will further simplify
the deployment process by providing an integrated experience within the development environment.

## Quickstart guide for zero-conf deployment of AI-developed apps {#quickstart-zero-conf-deployment-ai-developed-apps}

Prerequisites:
- An AI-developed app with a GitHub repository
- A mittwald hosting account
- Basic understanding of Git and GitHub

> - mittwald CLI installed and configured

Reviewer: Technically, the "GitHub" and "mittwald CLI" requirements are an "either/or" relation, aren't they?

When using the `mw experimental deploy` command directly, I'm not bound to GitHub or any code hosting solution, and when using the GitHub action, I don't need the mw CLI.

Author: Correct, yes. Still i want to keep these, as the guide points from first export, to first manual deploy, then towards automated action usage. While people may skip local CLI setup for example or deploy any kind of project folder using `mw` , here they work in tandem with *and* relation. Maybe i should still soften prerequisites with an explanation?

Manual quickstart steps:
1. Prepare your AI-developed app for deployment: verify that it runs locally and that all dependencies are installed.

```shellsession
user@local $ git clone https://github.com/<your-org>/<your-repo>.git
user@local $ cd <your-repo>
```

2. Make sure your local repository is in sync with GitHub and that your changes are committed and pushed.

```shellsession
user@local $ git pull
user@local $ git status
```

3. In your app folder, use the mittwald CLI to create a project and run the deployment command.

```shellsession
user@local $ mw project create --description=<project-name> --update-context

> user@local $ mw experimental deploy

Reviewer: Add a note regarding the experimental nature of the `mw experimental deploy` command?

---
title: Deploying AI-developed apps
sidebar_label: AI-developed apps
tags:
  - Deployment
  - GitHub
  - Apps
description: Structure and quickstart for shipping AI-developed apps with a zero-conf approach
---

## Introduction / Motivation {#introduction-motivation}

With rapidly advancing AI-driven development tools, building applications has become more accessible than ever.
We want to make it as easy as possible to take the apps you create — whether prototyped quickly or developed thoughtfully — and ship them to the world with confidence.

Besides rapid prototyping and development, we want to enable users to easily share their
AI-developed apps with others and deploy them to production environments without
needing to worry about complex deployment processes or configurations.

Whether you're building a small business app or a more complex application using AI-driven development, this guide will help you get
your app from your local machine (or cloud-based IDE) to the world with minimal friction.

Deploying an app is exciting — and worth doing thoughtfully. Compliance, privacy, security and operational

> responsibility matter, and we recommend connecting with our community if you have questions.

Reviewer 2: how can I connect? Link to discord?

and vice versa. This allows for a more seamless development and deployment process,
as developers can work on their code in GitHub while still having the benefits
of a live deployment environment.

## Principles and limits of zero-conf deployments {#principles-and-limits-of-zero-conf-deployments}

:::warning
Export quality varies, so test locally first. A well-structured export that includes all necessary code,
configuration, and build files makes deployment and maintenance much easier.
A partial or incomplete export may require rework during deployment or maintenance, and can create
issues with version control and collaboration.
:::

As most platforms deploy with custom pipelines and configurations,
we need to define a common denominator for zero-conf deployment.
In this context, zero-conf deployment means that we can take the exported code from GitHub
and deploy it to a platform without needing to make any manual changes or configurations.

In other words: End users should be able to deploy their AI-developed app with minimal setup,
ideally just by connecting their GitHub repository to a deployment platform that supports

> zero-conf deployment.

Reviewer 2: Above (L20ff) the users are addressed directly using `you`/`your’re`. Here (and later in this chapter) the third person is used to talk abut the same users. This feels a bit odd.

Keep the stack small: the more dependencies and services your app relies on, the more complex the deployment process becomes.

Use standard tools and configurations: sticking to widely used tools and configurations can increase compatibility
with various deployment platforms.

Document your app's requirements and dependencies clearly: this can help others understand what is needed to
deploy the app successfully and can also assist in troubleshooting any issues that arise during deployment.

Audit security and privacy best practices: ensuring that your app follows security and privacy best practices
can help prevent issues during deployment and operation. Avoid hardcoding secrets, use environment variables,
and regularly review your dependencies for vulnerabilities.

Deployment checklist:
- [ ] App runs locally without errors
- [ ] All secrets/keys are out of your code!
- [ ] README explains setup & usage
- [ ] Build/export scripts work
- [ ] Tested app in a browser/incognito window
- [ ] Backups: Save a copy of your project!
- [ ] Choose a reliable host that meets your needs

> - [ ] Shared the link with a friend — get feedback

Reviewer 2: The other points are all in present tense, this is not:

```suggestion
- [ ] Share the link with a friend — get feedback
```

- Manually via mittwald CLI
- Automated via GitHub Actions (see [deploying with GitHub Actions](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/container-actions/), specifically the [`zerodeploy-action`](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/container-actions/#deploy-with-zerodeploy-action))

The recommended approach is to start with the manual CLI deployment to understand the
process and then move towards automation with GitHub Actions for a more streamlined
and efficient deployment workflow.

A separate extension for mStudio is also in the works, which will further simplify
the deployment process by providing an integrated experience within the development environment.

## Quickstart guide for zero-conf deployment of AI-developed apps {#quickstart-zero-conf-deployment-ai-developed-apps}

Prerequisites:
- An AI-developed app with a GitHub repository
- A mittwald hosting account
- Basic understanding of Git and GitHub
- mittwald CLI installed and configured

Manual quickstart steps:
1. Prepare your AI-developed app for deployment: verify that it runs locally and that all dependencies are installed.

    ```shellsession
    user@local $ git clone https://github.com/<your-org>/<your-repo>.git

>     user@local $ cd <your-repo>

Reviewer 2: Just because I change in the directory, I did not „verify that it runs locally and that all dependencies are installed“. This might be misleading for unexperienced users

    ```

2. Make sure your local repository is in sync with GitHub and that your changes are committed and pushed.

    ```shellsession
    user@local $ git pull
    user@local $ git status
    ```

3. In your app folder, use the mittwald CLI to create a project and run the deployment command.

    ```shellsession
    user@local $ mw project create --description=<project-name> --update-context
    user@local $ mw experimental deploy
    ```

:::note
Note that the command used here is implemented in the `experimental` namespace,
which means that it is still in development and may be subject to change.
While the underlying code is stable, the command interface and behavior may evolve
as we gather feedback and iterate on the feature.
We recommend checking the latest documentation for any updates or changes to
the deployment process.
:::

Initial deployment takes a few minutes while the app is built and the hosting environment is set up.
Once the deployment is complete, you can access your app via the provided URL.

> Test your app in a browser, deployment command will create a subdomain and link to container target.

Reviewer 2: Containers are only available in mStudio [vServer plans](https://www.mittwald.de/vserver) and [dedicated server plans](https://www.mittwald.de/dedicated-server), not in [Webhosting plans](https://www.mittwald.de/webhosting). Is this a limitation that affects all of this? Are all deployments created through `mw experimental deploy` made by using containers?

Author: yes they are, will adjust

See the [full GitHub Actions deployment guide](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/container-actions/) for step-by-step instructions.

:::

Related guides for deeper setup:

- For **automated deployment with GitHub Actions**, start with the [`zerodeploy-action`](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/container-actions/#deploy-with-zerodeploy-action) which requires no Dockerfile or stack.yaml
- For advanced container deployments with explicit stack definitions, see the [`deploy-container-action`](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/container-actions/#deploy-with-deploy-container-action)
- For advanced deployment workflows and CI examples, see [Application deployment with deployer](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/deployer/).
- For container concepts, stack files, and registry setup, see [Containers](/docs/v2/platform/workloads/containers/).
- For declarative stack deployment commands, see [mw stack command reference](/docs/v2/cli/reference/stack/).

### Migrating from Replit to mittwald {#migrating-replit-to-mittwald}

> Replit ships exported apps in nodejs workspaces as monorepo Git repository.

Reviewer 2: Afaik there is no such thing as `node workspaces`. The correct naming is `npm workspaces`, or am I missing something?

In addition, Lovable apps might fail in deployment due to unresolved dependencies or
missing configuration files. To resolve these issues, it might be helpful to even
remove additional package managers like `bun` and stick to `npm` or `pnpm` for better
compatibility:

```shellsession
user@local $ rm bun.lock
```

Further reading on underlying package manager detection heuristics and configuration
options can be found in the [railpack documentation](https://railpack.com/languages/node).

[Lovable Git integration docs](https://docs.lovable.dev/integrations/github)

## Moving forward: Best practices for success {#moving-forward-best-practices}

As you prepare to deploy, consider these practices that help apps succeed:

- **Security and privacy matter.** Remove hardcoded secrets, use environment variables, and keep dependencies
up to date. These practices are straightforward and make your app more reliable. Both CLI command and
GitHub action support environment variables, so you can keep secrets out of your code and manage them securely.
- **Test early.** Deploy locally first, share with friends, and gather feedback before going live.

> - **Community is here.** Our mittwald Discord server is a great place to ask questions, share what you're building,

Reviewer 2: Again. Add link to discord or docs on how to become a member of the discord server

See the [full GitHub Actions deployment guide](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/container-actions/) for step-by-step instructions.

:::

Related guides for deeper setup:

- For **automated deployment with GitHub Actions**, start with the [`zerodeploy-action`](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/container-actions/#deploy-with-zerodeploy-action) which requires no Dockerfile or stack.yaml
- For advanced container deployments with explicit stack definitions, see the [`deploy-container-action`](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/container-actions/#deploy-with-deploy-container-action)
- For advanced deployment workflows and CI examples, see [Application deployment with deployer](/docs/v2/guides/deployment/deployer/).
- For container concepts, stack files, and registry setup, see [Containers](/docs/v2/platform/workloads/containers/).
- For declarative stack deployment commands, see [mw stack command reference](/docs/v2/cli/reference/stack/).

> ### Migrating from Replit to mittwald {#migrating-replit-to-mittwald}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploying from Replit to mittwald {#deploying-replit-to-mittwald}
```

> Replit ships exported apps in npm workspaces as monorepo Git repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Replit's Git integration](https://docs.replit.com/references/workspace-tools/git-interface) ships exported apps as a monorepo with multiple npm workspaces.
```

This means that if you export your app to GitHub, you can deploy it to mittwald
with some adjustments, most importantly picking the right workspace to build and serve.

In order to override Replit's default build and start commands, you can add
following variables during build time, e.g. to pick the `hello-world` workspace
in the example monorepo. From GitHub action workflow file:

```yaml
      - name: Deploy to Mittwald Container Hosting

>         uses: mittwald/rp-container-deploy-action@master

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        uses: mittwald/zerodeploy-action@master
```

        env:
          RAILPACK_BUILD_CMD: 'pnpm --filter @workspace/hello-world run build'
          RAILPACK_INSTALL_CMD: 'pnpm --filter @workspace/hello-world install'
          RAILPACK_START_CMD: 'pnpm --filter @workspace/hello-world run serve'
```

[Replit Git interface documentation](https://docs.replit.com/references/workspace-tools/git-interface)

> ### Migrating from Lovable to mittwald {#migrating-lovable-to-mittwald}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deploying from Lovable to mittwald {#deploying-lovable-to-mittwald}
```

> Apps created with Lovable can be exported to GitHub as a standard Node.js project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apps created with Lovable can be [exported to GitHub](https://docs.lovable.dev/integrations/github) as a standard Node.js project.
```

In order to deploy such app to mittwald hosting, we must ensure that the exported app
has a valid `package.json` file with the necessary build and start scripts defined.

In addition, Lovable apps might fail in deployment due to unresolved dependencies or
missing configuration files. To resolve these issues, it might be helpful to even
remove additional package managers like `bun` and stick to `npm` or `pnpm` for better
compatibility:

```shellsession
user@local $ rm bun.lock
```

Further reading on underlying package manager detection heuristics and configuration
options can be found in the [railpack documentation](https://railpack.com/languages/node).

> [Lovable Git integration docs](https://docs.lovable.dev/integrations/github)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
